The Fall of the House of Usher

Part One


It Was a dark and soundless day near the end of the year, and clouds were hanging low in the heavens.
 All day I had been riding on horseback through country with little life or beauty; and in the early evening I came withinview of the House of Usher.
I do not know how it was— but, with my first sight of thebuilding, a sense of heavy sadnessfilled my spirit.
 I looked at thescene before me — at the houseitself — at the ground around it— at the cold stone walls of thebuilding — at its empty eye-likewindows — and at a few dead trees — I looked at this scene, I say,with a complete sadness of soul which was no healthy, earthly feeling.
There was a coldness, a sickening of the heart, in which I could dis-cover nothing to lighten the weight I felt.
 What was it, I asked myself,what was it that was so fearful, so frightening in my view of the Houseof Usher? This was a question to which I could find no answer.
I stopped my horse beside the building, on the edge of a dark andquiet lake.
 There, I could see reflected in the water a clear pictureof the dead trees, and of the house and its empty eye-like windows.
I was now going to spend several weeks in this house of sadness —this house of gloom.
 Its owner was named Roderick Usher.
 We hadbeen friends when we were boys; but many years had passed since ourlast meeting.
 A letter from him had reached me, a wild letter whichdemanded that I reply by coming to see him.
 He wrote of an illness ofthe body — of a sickness of the mind — and of a desire to see me —his best and indeed his only friend.
 It was the manner in which all thiswas said — it was the heart in it — which did not allow me to say no.
Although as boys we had been together, I really knew little aboutmy friend.
 I knew, however, that his family, a very old one, had longbeen famous for its understanding of all the arts and for many quietacts of kindness to the poor.
 I had learned too that the family hadnever been a large one, with many branches.
 The name had passedalways from father to son, and when people spoke of the “House ofUsher,” they included both the family and the family home.
I again looked up from the picture of the house reflected in thelake to the house itself.
 A strange idea grew in my mind — an idea sostrange that I tell it only to show the force of the feelings which laidtheir weight on me.
 I really believed that around the whole house,and the ground around it, the air itself was different.
 It was not the airof heaven.
 It rose from the dead, decaying trees, from the gray walls,and the quiet lake.
 It was a sickly, unhealthy air that I could see,slow-moving, heavy, and gray.
Shaking off from my spirit what must have been a dream, I lookedmore carefully at the building itself.
 The most noticeable thing aboutit seemed to be its great age.
 None of the walls had fallen, yet thestones appeared to be in a condition of advanced decay.
 Perhaps thecareful eye would have discovered the beginning of a break in thefront of the building, a crack making its way from the top down thewall until it became lost in the dark waters of the lake.
I rode over a short bridge to the house.
 A man who worked in thehouse — a servant — took my horse, and I entered.
 Another servant,of quiet step, led me without a word through many dark turnings tothe room of his master.
 Much that I met on the way added, I do notknow how, to the strangeness of which I have already spoken.
 Whilethe objects around me — the dark wall coverings, the blackness ofthe floors, and the things brought home from long forgotten wars —while these things were like the things I had known since I was a baby— while I admitted that all this was only what I had expected — I wasstill surprised at the strange ideas which grew in my mind from thesesimple things.
The room I came into was very large and high.
 The windows werehigh, and pointed at the top, and so far above the black floor that theywere quite out of reach.
 Only a little light, red in color, made its waythrough the glass, and served to lighten the nearer and larger objects.
My eyes, however, tried and failed to see into the far, high corners ofthe room.
 Dark coverings hung upon the walls.
 The many chairs andtables had been used for a long, long time.
 Books lay around the room,but could give it no sense of life.
 I felt sadness hanging over every-thing.
 No escape from this deep cold gloom seemed possible.
As I entered the room, Usher stood up from where he had beenlying and met me with a warmth which at first I could not believe wasreal.
 A look, however, at his face told me that every word he spokewas true.
We sat down; and for some moments, while he said nothing, Ilooked at him with a feeling of sad surprise.
 Surely, no man had everbefore changed as Roderick Usher had! Could this be the friend of myearly years? It is true that his face had always been unusual.
 He hadgray-white skin; eyes large and full of light; lips not bright in color,but of a beautiful shape; a well-shaped nose; hair of great softness— a face that was not easy to forget.
 And now the increase in thisstrangeness of his face had caused so great a change that I almost didnot know him.
 The horrible white of his skin, and the strange lightin his eyes, surprised me and even made me afraid.
 His hair had beenallowed to grow, and in its softness it did not fall around his face butseemed to lie upon the air.
 I could not, even with an effort, see in myfriend the appearance of a simple human being.
In his manner, I saw at once, changes came and went; and Isoon found that this resulted from his attempt to quiet a very greatnervousness.
 I had indeed been prepared for something like this,partly by his letter and partly by remembering him as a boy.
 His actionswere first too quick and then too quiet.
 Sometimes his voice, slowand trembling with fear, quickly changed to a strong, heavy, carefullyspaced, too perfectly controlled manner.
 It was in this manner that hespoke of the purpose of my visit, of his desire to see me, and of thedeep delight and strength he expected me to give him.
 He told mewhat he believed to be the nature of his illness.
 It was, he said, a familysickness, and one from which he could not hope to grow better — butit was, he added at once, only a nervous illness which would withoutdoubt soon pass away.
 It showed itself in a number of strange feelings.
Some of these, as he told me of them, interested me but were beyondmy understanding; perhaps the way in which he told me of themadded to their strangeness.
 He suffered much from a sickly increase inthe feeling of all the senses; he could eat only the most tasteless food;all flowers smelled too strongly for his nose; his eyes were hurt by evena little light; and there were few sounds which did not fill him withhorror.
 A certain kind of sick fear was completely his master.
“I shall die,” he said.
 “I shall die! I must die of this fool’s sickness.
In this way, this way and no other way, I shall be lost.
 I fear what willhappen in the future, not for what happens, but for the result of whathappens.
 I have, indeed, no fear of pain, but only fear of its result —of terror! I feel that the time will soon arrive when I must lose mylife, and my mind, and my soul, together, in some last battle with thathorrible enemy: feaR!”
 
 
 Part Two
 

 RodeRick usheR, Whom i hadknown as a boy, was now illand had asked me to come tohelp him.
 When I arrived I feltsomething strange and fearfulabout the great old stone house,about the lake in front of it, andabout Usher himself.
 He appearednot like a human being, but likea spirit that had come back frombeyond the grave.
 It was anillness, he said, from which hewould surely die.
 He called hissickness fear.
 “I have,” he said,“no fear of pain, but only the fearof its result — of terror.
 I feelthat the time will soon arrive when I must lose my life, and my mind,and my soul, together, in some last battle with that horrible enemy:feaR!”I learned also, but slowly, and through broken words with doubt-ful meaning, another strange fact about the condition of Usher’s mind.
He had certain sick fears about the house in which he lived, and hehad not stepped out of it for many years.
 He felt that the house, withits gray walls and the quiet lake around it, had somehow through thelong years gotten a strong hold on his spirit.
He said, however, that much of the gloom which lay so heavily onhim was probably caused by something more plainly to be seen — bythe long-continued illness — indeed, the coming death — of a dearlyloved sister — his only company for many years.
 Except for himself,she was the last member of his family on earth.
 “When she dies,” hesaid, with a sadness which I can never forget, “when she dies, I will bethe last of the old, old family — the House of Usher.
”While he spoke, the lady Madeline (for so she was called) passedslowly through a distant part of the room, and without seeing that Iwas there, went on.
 I looked at her with a complete and wonderingsurprise and with some fear — and yet I found I could not explain tomyself such feelings.
 My eyes followed her.
 When she came to a doorand it closed behind her, my eyes turned to the face of her brother— but he had put his face in his hands, and I could see only that thethin fingers through which his tears were flowing were whiter thanever before.
The illness of the lady Madeline had long been beyond the helpof her doctors.
 She seemed to care about nothing.
 Slowly her body hadgrown thin and weak, and often for a short period she would fall intoa sleep like the sleep of the dead.
 So far she had not been forced tostay in bed; but by the evening of the day I arrived at the house, thepower of her destroyer (as her brother told me that night) was toostrong for her.
 I learned that my one sight of her would probably bethe last I would have — that the lady, at least while living, would beseen by me no more.
For several days following, her name was not spoken by eitherUsher or myself; and during this period I was busy with efforts to liftmy friend out of his sadness and gloom.
 We painted and read together;or listened, as if in a dream, to the wild music he played.
 And so, as awarmer and more loving friendship grew between us, I saw more clear-ly the uselessness of all attempts to bring happiness to a mind fromwhich only darkness came, spreading upon all objects in the world itsnever-ending gloom.
I shall always remember the hours I spent with the master of theHouse of Usher.
 Yet I would fail in any attempt to give an idea of thetrue character of the things we did together.
 There was a strange lightover everything.
 The paintings which he made made me tremble,though I know not why.
 To tell of them is beyond the power of writtenwords.
 If ever a man painted an idea, that man was Roderick Usher.
For me at least there came out of his pictures a sense of fear andwonder.
One of these pictures may be told, although weakly, in words.
It showed the inside of a room where the dead might be placed, withlow walls, white and plain.
 It seemed to be very deep under the earth.
There was no door, no window; and no light or fire burned; yet a riverof light flowed through it, filling it with a horrible, ghastly brightness.
I have spoken of that sickly condition of the senses, which mademost music painful for Usher to hear.
 The notes he could listen towith pleasure were very few.
 It was this fact, perhaps, that made themusic he played so different from most music.
 But the wild beauty ofhis playing could not be explained.
The words of one of his songs, called “The Haunted Palace,” Ihave easily remembered.
 In it I thought I saw, and for the first time,that Usher knew very well that his mind was weakening.
 This songtold of a great house where a king lived — a palace — in a greenvalley, where all was light and color and beauty, and the air was sweet.
In the palace were two bright windows through which people in thathappy valley could hear music and could see smiling ghosts — spirits— moving around the king.
 The palace door was of the richest mate-rials, in red and white; through it came other spirits whose only dutywas to sing in their beautiful voices about how wise their king was.
But a dark change came, the song continued, and now those whoenter the valley see through the windows, in a red light, shapes thatmove to broken music; while through the door, now colorless, a ghast-ly river of ghosts, laughing but no longer smiling, rushes out forever.
Our talk of this song led to another strange idea in Usher’s mind.
He believed that plants could feel and think, and not only plants, butrocks and water as well.
 He believed that the gray stones of his house,and the small plants growing on the stones, and the decaying trees,had a power over him that made him what he was.
Our books — the books which, for years, had fed the sick man’smind — were, as might be supposed, of this same wild character.
Some of these books Usher sat and studied for hours.
 His chief delightwas found in reading one very old book, written for some forgottenchurch, telling of the Watch over the Dead.
At last, one evening he told me that the lady Madeline was aliveno more.
 He said he was going to keep her body for a time in one ofthe many vaults inside the walls of the building.
 The worldly reasonhe gave for this was one with which I felt I had to agree.
 He haddecided to do this because of the nature of her illness, because of thestrange interest and questions of her doctors, and because of the greatdistance to the graveyard where members of his family were placedin the earth.
We two carried her body to its resting place.
 The vault in whichwe placed it was small and dark, and in ages past it must have seenstrange and bloody scenes.
 It lay deep below that part of the buildingwhere I myself slept.
 The thick door was of iron, and because of itsgreat weight made a loud, hard sound when it was opened and closed.
As we placed the lady Madeline in this room of horror I saw forthe first time the great likeness between brother and sister, and Ushertold me then that they were twins — they had been born on the sameday.
 For that reason the understanding between them had always beengreat, and the tie that held them together very strong.
We looked down at the dead face one last time, and I was filledwith wonder.
 As she lay there, the lady Madeline looked not dead butasleep — still soft and warm — though to the touch cold as the stonesaround us.


Part Three


i Was visiTing an old fRiendof mine, Roderick Usher, in hisold stone house, his palace, wherea feeling of death hung on the air.
I saw how fear was pressing on hisheart and mind.
 Now his only sis-ter, the lady Madeline, had diedand we had put her body in itsresting place, in a room inside thecold walls of the palace, a damp,dark vault, a fearful place.
 As welooked down upon her face, I sawthat there was a strong likenessbetween the two.
 “Indeed,” saidUsher, “we were born on the sameday, and the tie between us hasalways been strong.
”We did not long look down at her, for fear and wonder filled ourhearts.
 There was still a little color in her face and there seemed to bea smile on her lips.
 We closed the heavy iron door and returned to therooms above, which were hardly less gloomy than the vault.
And now a change came in the sickness of my friend’s mind.
 Hewent from room to room with a hurried step.
 His face was, if possible,whiter and more ghastly than before, and the light in his eyes hadgone.
 The trembling in his voice seemed to show the greatest fear.
At times he sat looking at nothing for hours, as if listening to somesound I could not hear.
 I felt his condition, slowly but certainly, gain-ing power over me; I felt that his wild ideas were becoming fixed inmy own mind.
As I was going to bed late in the night of the seventh or eighthday after we placed the lady Madeline within the vault, I experiencedthe full power of such feelings.
 Sleep did not come — while the hourspassed.
 My mind fought against the nervousness.
 I tried to believethat much, if not all, of what I felt was due to the gloomy room, to thedark wall coverings, which in a rising wind moved on the walls.
 Butmy efforts were useless.
 A trembling I could not stop filled my body,and fear without reason caught my heart.
 I sat up, looking into thedarkness of my room, listening — I do not know why — to certain lowsounds which came when the storm was quiet.
 A feeling of horror layupon me like a heavy weight.
 I put on my clothes and began walkingnervously around the room.
I had been walking for a very short time when I heard a light stepcoming toward my door.
 I knew it was Usher.
 In a moment I saw himat my door, as usual very white, but there was a wild laugh in his eyes.
Even so, I was glad to have his company.
 “And have you not seen it?”he said.
 He hurried to one of the windows and opened it to the storm.
The force of the entering wind nearly lifted us from our feet.
 Itwas, indeed, a stormy but beautiful night, and wildly strange.
 Theheavy, low-hanging clouds which seemed to press down upon thehouse, flew from all directions against each other, always returningand never passing away in the distance.
 With their great thicknessthey cut off all light from the moon and the stars.
 But we could seethem because they were lighted from below by the air itself, which wecould see, rising from the dark lake and from the stones of the houseitself.
“You must not — you shall not look out at this!” I said to Usher,as I led him from the window to a seat.
 “This appearance which sur-prises you so has been seen in other places, too.
 Perhaps the lake isthe cause.
 Let us close this window; the air is cold.
 Here is one of thestories you like best.
 I will read and you shall listen and thus we willlive through this fearful night together.
”The old book which I had picked up was one written by a foolfor fools to read, and it was not, in truth, one that Usher liked.
 It was,however, the only one within easy reach.
 He seemed to listen quietly.
Then I came to a part of the story in which a man, a strong man fullof wine, begins to break down a door, and the sound of the dry woodas it breaks can be heard through all the forest around him.
Here I stopped, for it seemed to me that from some very distantpart of the house sounds came to my ears like those of which I hadbeen reading.
 It must have been this likeness that had made me noticethem, for the sounds themselves, with the storm still increasing, werenothing to stop or interest me.
I continued the story, and read how the man, now enteringthrough the broken door, discovers a strange and terrible animal ofthe kind so often found in these old stories.
 He strikes it and it falls,with such a cry that he has to close his ears with his hands.
 Here againI stopped.
There could be no doubt.
 This time I did hear a distant sound,very much like the cry of the animal in the story.
 I tried to controlmyself so that my friend would see nothing of what I felt.
 I was notcertain that he had heard the sound, although he had clearly changedin some way.
 He had slowly moved his chair so that I could not seehim well.
 I did see that his lips were moving as if he were speaking tohimself.
 His head had dropped forward, but I knew he was not asleep,for his eyes were open and he was moving his body from side to side.
I began reading again, and quickly came to a part of the storywhere a heavy piece of iron falls on a stone floor with a ringing sound.
These words had just passed my lips when I heard clearly, but from faraway, a loud ringing sound — as if something of iron had indeed fallenheavily upon a stone floor, or as if an iron door had closed.
I lost control of myself completely, and jumped up from my chair.
Usher still sat, moving a little from side to side.
 His eyes were turnedto the floor.
 I rushed to his chair.
 As I placed my hand on his shoulder,I felt that his whole body was trembling; a sickly smile touched hislips; he spoke in a low, quick, and nervous voice as if he did not knowI was there.
“Yes!” he said.
 “I heard it! Many minutes, many hours, many dayshave I heard it — but I did not dare to speak! We have put her livingin the vault! Did I not say that my senses were too strong? I heard herfirst movements many days ago — yet I did not dare to speak! Andnow, that story — but the sounds were hers! Oh, where shall I run?!She is coming — coming to ask why I put her there too soon.
 I hearher footsteps on the stairs.
 I hear the heavy beating of her heart.
”Here he jumped up and cried as if he were giving up his soul: “i Tellyou , she noW sTands aT The dooR!!”The great door to which he was pointing now slowly opened.
 Itwas the work of the rushing wind, perhaps — but no — outside thatdoor a shape did stand, the tall figure, in its grave-clothes, of the ladyMadeline of Usher.
 There was blood upon her white dress, and thesigns of her terrible efforts to escape were upon every part of her thinform.
 For a moment she remained trembling at the door; then, with alow cry, she fell heavily in upon her brother; in her pain, as she diedat last, she carried him down with her, down to the floor.
 He too wasdead, killed by his own fear.
I rushed from the room; I rushed from the house.
 I ran.
 The stormwas around me in all its strength as I crossed the bridge.
 Suddenlya wild light moved along the ground at my feet, and I turned to seewhere it could have come from, for only the great house and its dark-ness were behind me.
 The light was that of the full moon, of a blood-red moon, which was now shining through that break in the frontwall, that crack which I thought I had seen when I first saw the palace.
Then only a little crack, it now widened as I watched.
 A strong windcame rushing over me — the whole face of the moon appeared.
 I sawthe great walls falling apart.
 There was a long and stormy shoutingsound — and the deep black lake closed darkly over all that remainedof the house of usheR.
